## How does an EV work? 
### Motor and Energy Storage
#### The  main  differences  between  electric  vehicles  and conventional vehicles

In essence there are  two  fundamental  characteristics  that  all  cars  have  that  you  have  to  understand.  
The   first   fundamental   characteristic   is   the   energy   storage.The   second   fundamental characteristic 
is the motor. 

Let's start with the motor. The motorconverts potential energy into kinetic energy.You  might  think  that  there  
are  many  types  of  motorsout  there, and  if  you  look  at  all  the articles about different types of gasoline 
engines you might think that’s true,but in essence there are only two types of motors. This has been true since the 
beginning of human history. So pay attention because this is information that you can use forever. The first motor 
is the heat engine, and the second one is the electric engine.In a heat engine, burning releases the potential chemical 
energy in a fuel. Thisheat produces expansion and this in turn drives some mostly rotary motion.This is true for steam 
engines, sterling engines, diesel engines and gasoline engines.The  picture  shows  how  a  four  stroke  engine  works.  
This  is  basically  the  modern  gasoline engine and it was invented 150 years ago. On the first stroke, gasoline is 
injected into a chamber by opening a valve that is then closed again. On the second stroke, the cylinder moves upwards 
and the gasoline is compressed. On the third stroke the energy in the fuel is harvested by igniting it. The resulting 
explosion drives the cylinder down and that produces a rotating motion. This  is  comparable  to  a  bicyclebasically,  
where  pushing  down  the  pedal  moves  the  bicycle forwards. On the fourth and final stroke, the energy burned is 
emitted. It’s all very ingenious but a heat engine has numerous problems.The  entire  engine  requires  hundreds  of  
precisely  crafted  moving  parts.  That  makes  the engine heavy and expensive. And  since  all  the  heat  and  
explosions  cause  a  lot  of  wear  and  tear,  you  need  a  lot  of maintenance and even then it wears down pretty 
quickly. The  heat  engine  also  wastes  a  lot  of  energy.  In  theory  we  could  improve  the  efficiency  to about 
50%,but that would mean a couple of things. Firstly,the engine would become more expensive.  Secondly,  it  would  have  
to  run  at  analmost  constant  numberof  explosionsper minute, which is very hard to do in the real world. Finally the  
motor  should be  run  at  almost  maximum  power. In  practice,  even  though  we've been improving the internal combustion 
engine for more than 150 years now, a regular car wastes more  than 75%  of  the  energy  it  consumes as  heat. And  a sports  car  like  the  Bugatti Veyron wastes more than 95% of energy if you drive it in regular city traffic. For  health  and  climate  change  the  biggest  problem  is  the  exhaust  fumes.  These  fumes  are unhealthy but the biggest problem is that burning 1 liter of gasoline produces 2.3 kilogram of carbondioxide gas.Now let’s look at the electric engine. It all works completely different. We  will  dive  into  all the types of electric engines later, but fundamentally they all work by using magnetic fields. You  might  still  remember  from  school  that  magnets  have  poles.  We  say  they  have  a  north pole  and  a  south  pole,  just  like  earth.  If  you  put  two  magnets  together  you  will  see  that opposites attract. If  we  take  a  coil  of  wire  and  make  electricity  flow  through  it,  it  creates  its  own  magnetic field. It has become a magnet. If  we  place  this  magnetic  coil  between two  magnets,  one  side  of  the  coil  will be  pushed up and the other side will be pushed down. This makes the coil turn until it is vertical. At that moment we quickly change the polarity. That way you can create rotary motion and what you are seeing here is a simplified direct current motor in action. The  advantages  of  the  electric  motor  are  numerous. It  only  has  one  moving  part,  we  call that the rotor. Therefore, it can be relatively light, compact and inexpensive. And since magnetic fields are very  gentle,  an  electric  motor  can  last  essentially  forever  without  any  maintenance.  Energy efficiency, that’s very important, can be close to a 100% and you can even win back energy whenbraking. So  theoretically,  it  takes  you  over  100%  if  you  compare  it  to  the  gasoline engine that is only 25% efficient. Because of this, the average electric car is four times more efficient than the average conventional car. And if you compare sports carsthe electric car is up to twenty times more efficient. So oversizing an electric engine doesn't materially reduce efficiency and the engines are cheap and light. That's one reason why, in practice, electric vehicles can accelerate much faster. 
For  health  and  climate  the  biggest  advantage  is  clear:  it  can  run  on  renewable  energy  and the motor itself has 
zero emissions.This sheets sums it all up and it's clear the electric motor is superior in every way. So why did weend up 
with the gasoline engine? Theanswer to that question isenergy storage.When you look  at motors, the electric engine has the 
upper hand.But if you look at energy storage, the heat engine has the upper hand:Fuel is a really marvelous way to store energy.Batteries compare very poorlyto that. A  lead  acid  battery  from  1900  stored  only  around  0.01  kWh  per  kg:  that's  more  than  1000 timeslessthan gasoline! No wonder the gasoline engine won!A  lead  acid  battery  at  the  end  of  the  last  millennium  was  better  at  0.035  kWh  per  kg  but that's still about 350 timesworse.A  nickel metal  hydrate  available  at  the  turn of  the  new millennium  stores 0.08  kWh.This  is still 150 timesless.But  then  people  woke  up,  primarily  because  they  needed  lighter  batteries  for  cell  phones and laptops. And now a lithium battery as produced by the Tesla Gigafactory has about 0.25 kWh/kg, still 50 timesworse.In the near future (say within ten years) we can expect batteries that store double that, still 30 timesworse.Theoretically, lithium air batteries can even hold more energy than gasoline. But that is very very  theoretical.  Soif  we  take  the  efficiency  of  the  motor  into  account, we  could  have  a theoretical  situation  where  actually  the  batteries  are  lighter. Howeverthat  is  only  a  very long-term perspective.Now it’s really important that you understand how this works in practice because in practice the difference becomes much smaller.So imagine we make a car; a conventional car and an electric car andwe want to beable to drive a distance of 500 kilometers, right? So average car, 500 kilometers.In  1900  we  would  have  needed  to  take  10.000  kg  with  us:  a very  very  big  elephantin  your ordinary car.No wonder the gasoline engine won right!At  the  end  of  the  last  century you still had  to  take a  rhinoceros on  top  of  your  car,  about twice or three times as heavy as your own car.The nickel metal hydrate battery turned it into an 800 kilogram Bison.But  with  the  advent  of  the  lithium  battery, you  remember  the  one  we  did  because  we needed  light  batteries  for  our  smart  phones,the  10.000  kg  elephant  has  now  turned into  a 400 kg silverback gorilla.Still a big guy to take with you, but better right?
Within ten years it will be a 200 kg or a pig.Now  you  might  say:  a  200  kg  pigis  still  pretty  heavy.  But  if  you  
take  the  weight  of  the drivetrain  into  account,  the  electric  drivetrain  is  so  much  lighter  that  the  entire  
electric vehicle will actually be lighter overall in 2025! So  the  idea  that  batteries  make  electric  cars  heavy  
will  soon  be  something  of  the  past.Really!The reason that I put so  much emphasis on weight is not just because it 
allows you to build lighter and nimbler vehicles. Just as important is the fact that something that is lighter needs less 
raw materials and in the end that means it’s probably going tobe cheaper. So  by  making  the  battery  plus  drivetrain  
lighter  for  an  electric  vehicle,  we  can also make  it cheaper. And  then  all  the  efficiency  advantages  come  
into  play. And  youalso  save25  000 liters of fuel over the lifetime of the car.So to wrap it up:There  are  essentially  
only  two  motors  for  cars:  heat  engines to propel  the  car  forward  by burning  fuel.  Electric  engines  that  
use  much  more  gentle  and  efficient  magnetic  fields. Electric engines are superior in almost every way: They’re 
lighter, smaller,  cheaper,  require no maintenance, are four timesmore efficient, cause no exhaust, and can run on 
renewable electricity.  The  problem  was  that  batteries  used  to  be  incredibly  heavy.  Heavier  than  an elephant! 
But due to incredible developments in battery technology in the first years of this millennium, the weight of battery 
plus drivetrain will soon be less for an electric vehicle. Taking  the  fuel  savings  and  efficiency  into  account  
that  means  the  electric  vehicle  will  be much, much cheaper to own. 
