## how to estimate forces on the vehicle and power that needs to be delivered by powertrain to control the vehicle speed

There are three learning objectives for this lecture. 
    First, what are the forces acting on a vehicle when it’s driving? 
      Namely, the rolling resistance force, the aerodynamic drag force, and the gradient force.  
    Secondly, how to use the traction forces to control the vehicle speed?
    And finally, How should the powertrain of the vehicle be sized?
    
Let us start by analysing the rolling resistance force. The rolling resistance force occurs due to the 
friction between the tires and the driving surface. The rolling resistance force is zero at standstill.  
When the vehicle starts moving, the rolling resistance force acts in the direction opposite to the 
direction of motionand can be calculated by the rolling resistance coefficient ‘C_r’ multiplied by the 
normalforce between the vehicle and the road. For a flat surface, the normal force is the vehicle mass 
‘m’ times the standard gravity ‘g’.In case of a road with an inclination angle ‘thetha’, the normal 
force becomes the weight ‘m.g’ multiplied by the cosine of the road angle. It is important to note that 
the rolling resistance force is independent of the vehicle speed, and it is always opposite the driving 
direction.  The coefficient C_r should be low so as to keep the frictional losses low. For modern cars, 
it’s typically around 0.01 to 0.02.As the vehicle speed increase, the aerodynamic drag force opposes the 
vehicle motion as the air as is forced to flow around the moving vehicle. . It can be calculated as the 
product of the aerodynamic drag coefficient ‘C_d’, the front area of the vehicle ‘A_f’, the air density 
‘ρ’ and the square of the vehicle speed ‘v’, divided by 2. It is hence important to note that the 
aerodynamic drag in independent of vehicle mass but has a strong dependence on the vehicle speed. That is 
why in a car, the aerodynamic drag force is higher than the rolling resistance force when the speed is 
above about 70 to 80 km/h. Secondly, The coefficient of drag is typically about 0.25 to 0.35 for a modern 
car. SUVs, with their typically boxy shapes, have coefficients in the range of 0.35 to 0.45. The third force 
that acts on a vehicleis the gradient force, and it occurs when the vehicle is driving  on  an  uphill  or  
a  downhill  road.    The  gradient  force  is  due  to  the  longitudinal component of gravitational force, 
namely ‘mgsin(θ)’ where theta is the inclination angle of the road. As seen earlier, the cosine component, 
‘mgcos(θ)’ contributes to the normal force and the corresponding rolling resistance force.The gradient force 
and the angle thetha are negative when driving downhill, and positive when driving uphill.  Road gradients 
are expressed as a percentage in terms of tangent theta and have a value typically between plus or minus 10%. 
If we now consider a vehicle moving on an inclined surface, then the aerodynamic drag force, the rolling 
resistance force and the gradient force act on the vehicle.  If we now include the traction force provided 
by the vehicle powertrain, then the net force on the vehicle, F_net, is the difference between the traction 
force and the sum of the forces due to the aerodynamic drag, the rolling resistance and the road gradient.By 
Newton’s second law, the net force is equal to the product of the vehicle mass and vehicle acceleration. 
Therefore, we can control the vehicle acceleration and thereby the speed by controlling the traction force 
that the powertrain produces. The traction force is in the driving direction most of  the  time,  but  it  can  
be  zero  when  the  vehicle  is  coasting  or  even  negative  when  the powertrain is under regenerative 
braking.If we now expand the equation for the traction force, we can see the factors that influence the vehicle 
forces: the vehicle mass and road angle effects the rolling resistance andgradient force, vehicle speed decides 
the aerodynamic drag force, and the rest of the traction force decides  the  vehicle  acceleration.    If  we  
need  to  estimate  the  power  delivered  by  the powertrain P_tract, then we need to multiply the traction 
force F_tract with the speed of the vehicle v. It is important to realise that in this lecture, we only take 
into account the forces in the forward and reverse direction, as they influence the powertrain. The forces in 
other directions are neglected for simplicity.Secondly, the forces in the vehicle are assumed to be acting at 
one point. In reality, the forces are distributed over the vehicle. Let us now look at a force/speed diagram of 
a vehicle with a mass of 1.5 ton, frontal area of 2.5m^2 and the speed range of 0-200 km/h.  From the formula 
for the traction force, we can calculate the force at each speed level for zero vehicle acceleration. Those points 
make a force/speed curve of this car.  When the speed is close to zero, then traction force is used to overcome  
the  rolling  resistance  force.    As  the  speed  increase,  the  traction  force  needed increases fast, as 
the aerodynamic force increase with the square of the speed.Next, let us investigate 3 road conditions, a flat 
road, a 5% gradient uphill, and a 5% gradient downhill.  We can see in the downhill condition, the traction force 
needed for low speeds is negative, as the gradient force is larger than combined rolling resistance and aerodynamic 
drag forces.  On the other hand, the uphill gradient requiresa significantly higher traction force for the same 
speed than the 0% or downhill gradient. Finally,  let’s  consider  the  case  when  the  vehicle  has  a  finite 
acceleration. This  is  the speed/force curve for the same car with 0% gradient and zero acceleration.Since the 
mass of the  car  is  1500kg,  for  every  1m/s2  acceleration,  an  extra  1500N  traction  force  from  the 
powertrain would be required. 

