## Drivetrains of Conventional and (hybrid) Electric Vehicles
Are plug-in hybrid electric vehicles more than just a temporary stepping stone to full electric vehicles? Why would you put up with the losses and complexity of fuel cell electric vehicle? In this video we will talk about the pro’s and cons of different types  of  electric  cars. Specifically: hybrid electric vehicles, plug-in hybrid electric vehicles, full electric vehicles and fuel cell electric vehicles. I want to start with the conventional car withits internal combustion.A quick recap of why we want to get rid of the internal combustion engine: Burning fossil fuels causes global warming and the exhaust pollutes the environment. The  engine  throws  away  75%  of  the  energy  it  uses and produces noise  as  an  unwanted  by-product. Finally  the  motor  is  heavy  and  expensive  with  lots  of  moving  parts,  requires  all  kinds  of support like a gearbox and exhaust treatment system and requires a lot of maintenance over the lifetime of the car.Biofuels  are  sometimes  seen  as  an  alternative...a non-electric  alternative...that  makes  the internal  combustion  engine  unproblematic  but  of  all  the  problems  mentioned  earlier only CO2 emissionsare addressed. Biofuels  themselves  are  also  highly  problematic.  There  are  many  reasons  but  they  are  all related to the fact that biofuels areincredibly inefficient. It’s an incredible inefficientway to harvest  and store the  energy  of  the  sun. If  you  use  solar  panels,  a 20%  efficiency  is  normal and you end up with 14% of the power of the sun to drive the wheelsof the electric vehicle. But photosynthesis is a much less efficient process. Although some biofuels might harvest a few  percent,  on  average  biofuels  harvest  less  than  half  of  a  percent.  And  after  refining, transport, and the inefficient internal combustion engine you typically end up with less than one   tenth   of   a   percentthat   actually   drive   the   wheels.   Apart   from   being   hopelessly inefficient,  biofuels  need  scarce  water  and  fertile  ground  and  are  therefore –almost  by definition –in competition with food and nature. Don’t get me wrong:using  biofuels  from  waste  that  cannot  be  turned  into  feedstock  is  a great idea! Some advanced biofuels from algae that are also non-competitive with food and nature are a great idea. And there are some agricultural practises like short rotational cropping that are mostly  harmless.  And  there  are  some  use  cases  that  are  very  hard  to  achieve  without biofuels. 
For example intercontinental flights with airplanes. But putting biofuels in cars creates more problems than it solves.All  these  problems  with  the  combustion  engine  and  biofuels,  led  us  to  the  electric  engine. And the first step we took was the hybrid electric vehicle.As  the  name  implies,  the  hybrid  electric  vehicle  is  a  mix  of  a  conventional  vehicle  with  an electric  vehicle.  The  battery  and  electric motor  are  scaled  up  and  used  instead  of  the gasoline  engine  on  moments  when  the  conventional  engine  is  less  efficient,  such  as  during stop and go traffic. On other moments the gasoline engine recharges the battery. By using the electric motor in situations  where  the  internal  combustion  engine  is   especially  problematic  the  overall efficiency  from  the  vehicle  increases  and the  wear  and  tear  on the  combustion engine  and brake pads decreases. Over  the  lifetime  of  the  car  there  is  a  clear  financial  advantage  because  the  savings  in gasoline  or  diesel  easily  outweigh  the  extra  cost  of  producing  this  drivetrain.  However,  the advantages  areverylimited.  If  you  add  hybridization  to  an  already  frugal  gasoline  engine you might save 10 or even 20 percent but that is about as far as savings can go.The   plugin-hybrid   electric   vehicle   takes   this   a   step   further.   It   basically   has   BOTH   a conventional drivetrain and an  electric  drivetrain.  It  can  get  its  energy  from  both fossil  fuel and electricity.Its  biggest  advantage  is  a  long  range  with  a  small  battery  while  you  can  quickly  replenish your energy storage but using a gasoline station. Its biggest disadvantages compared to fully electric car    are:    First    amore    expensive    and    complex    drivetrain    requiring    more maintenance...and more  expensive  in  terms  of  energy  used. Less CO2 reduction...and  still some unhealthy exhaust. Now  one  of  the  things  I'm  asked  most  often  is:  do  you  think  there  is  a  future  for  plugin-hybrids. And my answer is: according to a lot of my peers the jury is still out. But I do a lot of total  cost  of  ownership  modeling  myself,  using  my  agent-based  SparkCity  model.  And  with the  way  battery  prices  are  plummeting  while  fast-charging  is  becoming  ever  faster  I  really don't see a future for plug-in hybrids?But that's my opinion. We have included an exercise in the course content so you can judge by yourself.Now we move to the full electric vehicle. Here the conventional drivetrain is completely left out. So  we  have  dumped  the  fuel  tank,  internal  combustion  engine,  differential,  gearbox  and exhaust system.
The  full  electric  vehicle  ditches  the  internal  combustion  engine  completely.  It  runs  entirely on electricity and only uses the electric motor with all its advantages. One  of  the  interesting  things  in  terms  of  driving  that  one  pedal  driving  is  increasingly common.  This  means  that  you  only  use  brakes  in  emergencies.  Otherwise  you  simply accelerate  by  pushing  the  throttle  pedal  and  decelerate  by  letting  go  of  the  throttle  pedal. Of  course  brakingthis  way  has  the  added  advantage  of  regenerating  energy.  The  biggest disadvantageof a full electric vehicleis that you need a large battery to get a decent range. My surveys lead me to believe that experienced EV drivers will be satisfied by a range of 400 to 500 km and simply won’t see the advantage of a lager battery. That means that we should expect EVs with a range similar to the Tesla models to dominate in the future. Of  course  full  electric  vehicles  need  fast  charging  capabilityfor  the  occasionallong  trip. Currently  that  is  often  50kW  which  translates  to  about  250  km  of  range  in  an  hour  of charging.  But  I  expect  that  in  five  years  time  the  average  for  new  cars  will  be  250  km  of range in about 15 minutes.The biggest reason for the rise of FEVs isnot climate but money. Since they need only about one  third  of  the  energy  and  maintenance  they  are  simply  cheaper  to  own.  And  as  battery prices come down, the sticker price becomes more reasonable too. To drive this message home and to show how much things are changing I included a simple calculation.It’s based on an average car. For the US it would be pretty compact and for the EU it would be pretty big. We  see  that  the  electric  drivetrain  was  a  bit  more  expensive  in  the  year  2000  but  will  be much cheaper in 2030. The low cost of electric drivetrains also explains  why Tesla can offer supercar  performance  at  a relatively  low  price.  The  battery  is  the  biggie. In  2000  a range  of 400 km cost as much asa 100 thousand dollars. But  already  we  see  a fivefold reduction in  price  and in  2030  we  expect  a tenfold  reduction. There  is  really  no  competing  for  the  internal  combustion  engine  with  these  overwhelming battery developments. Fuel is where the FEV starts to score. Over  the  lifetime  of  the  car  you  easily  saveanywhere from  10  to  30  thousand  dollars.  30 thousand  dollars  that  you  save  with  a  fun  car...The  savings  in  maintenance  are  also  pretty substantial. The end result is that in 2000 the electric vehicle had a huge disadvantage but in 2030 it has a huge advantage. And  if  you  want  to  drive  a  large  or  a  fun  and  sporty  car,  the  advantage  of  the  FEV  will  be even bigger. I  do  TCO  calculations  a  lot  and  the  fundamental  economics  of  the  competing  technologies are really clear. 
For  this  reason  I  predict  that  the  conventional  vehicle  and  even  the  plug-in  electric  vehicle will quickly make way for the full electric vehicle.One of the most interesting cases is the full electric heavy long haul truck. A disproportionate amount of CO2 is emitted by these vehicles so if we can electrify them it would really make a big change for the planet. The heavy electric truck was long considered impossible  to  electrify  but  when you  look  at  the  economics,  that  assumption will be  invalid pretty soon.When  you  look at  the TCO  you  realise  that  the  heavy  electric  truck  is  actually  the  best candidate  for  electrification.  The  electric  vehicle  must  earn  back  the  battery  by  using  it  as much as possible. And  heavy  trucks  make  a  lot  of  kilometres  which means  a lot  of  potential energy  saving to pay  back  the  battery.  And  because  the  focus  of  heavy  trucks  is  heavily  on  total  cost  of ownership this market will flip as soon as the electric truck is cheaper. For  that  reason I predict  even  faster adoption than for  electric  cars. One  thing  that  still has to happen is fast charging infrastructure for heavy trucks. You  are  talking  about  beasts  with  a  power  of  1  or  even  2  megawatts!  Although  that  is  not unheard of for trains it is still new territory for road traffic. But I think it will happen becausethe economics are very good.You can verify my assumptions because I detailed them in a series of blogposts. (The Jounal article  is  still  in  development.)  Bottom  line  is  that  my  calculations  indicate  that  diesel  cars will be uncompetitive in 2025. And thecharging infrastructure for heavy trucks has an even better business than fast chargers for normal cars.Finally there's the hydrogen fuel cell vehicle.Now  the  first  thing  many  people  forget  is  that  a  hydrogen  fuel  cell  vehicle  is  basically  a battery electric vehicle with a range extender. So in terms of drivetrain it's simplistic to see it as a competitor to the electric vehicle. And it has some clear advantages over the battery electric vehicle: You need a smaller battery. You can drive really long distances if you have enough space for the hydrogen tanks and you can refuel them very fast. The problem is that at the moment 90% of hydrogen is made from natural gas in a way that does not  reduce  emissions  at  all and even  if  we  produce  it  in  a green way,  the  efficiency  is much lower. Let me explain.
Remember  how  I showed  that  solar  panels  captured  20%  of  the  power  of  the  sun  and that the electric vehicle would have 14% left to drive the wheels? With hydrogen a lot of energy is lost in the conversion from electricity to hydrogen and back again. You end up with about one third of the energy. In the far future maybe half. However, there is more to this story. If you have a large amount of  solar  and  wind,  say  above  80%,  chances  are  that  you  need  to  curtail –basically  throw away –a lot of wind and solar. Storing this in hydrogen is of course much more efficient. And  if  you  go  for  100%  solar  and  wind,  you  badly  need  some  form  of  chemical  storage  to survive  weeks  or  months  of  little  wind  and  solar.  Also,  there  might  be  locations  that  have abundant solar and wind but no connection to the grid. For  example Siberia  orAustralia.  In  those  cases  capturing  the  energy  as  hydrogen  and transporting  it  using  pipelines  or  container  ships  would  be  much  cheaper  than  creating  a grid connection. Sohydrogen has a place in the renewable economy of the future. I’m not sure at all that hydrogen in cars is a logical and economic solution. What will determine the future of hydrogen are the price developments in fuel cells, storage and electrolysis so I for one will be following this field with a lot of interest and I hope we are smart enough to fund a lot of R&D.That   brings   me   to   my  conclusions.   All   the   hybrid   drivetrains   are   complex,   especially compared to the full electric vehicle. As  battery  prices continue  to  plummet  there  will  be  a  move  from  hybridization  to  more electric  and my  personal expectation is  that  we  will skip the  plug-in  hybrids  and go  directly to the full electric vehicle.Not  only  for  passenger  cars  but  especially  for  heavy  trucks. Ifyou  look  at  the  fundamental economics  of  the  different  drivetrains  one  thing  is  very  clear:  the  internal  combustion engine is on the way out.I  hope  this  gave  you  some  sense  of  the  different  drivetrains  and  I  thank  you  for  your attention.
