Electrical  engineers  have  dozens  of   ways  to  classify  the  motor  which  can  be  utterly confusing. 
Mechanical  engineers  look  at  properties  like  size,  weight  and  maximum  torque.  Practical builders  
look  at  things  like  availability,  simplicity  and  robustness.  Economists  and  business people could 
be interested in purchase price and efficiency. And finally, people interested in the  environment  are often 
interested  in  the  use  of  scarce  earth  metals  andtheefficiency thatit pertains to CO2 emissions. 
Covering  all  motors  and  all  angles  is  impossible  so  we  will discusson  the  three  types  of electric 
motors used in almost all electric vehicles.  We  will  focus  on  the  induction  motor, the permanent  
magnet  motor  and the synchronous reluctance motor. Before we proceed to motors used in electric vehicles, 
let us start explanation with the classic and simple DC brushed motor. This motor has a fixed part, called 
the stator –because it is static –that containsmagnets. It also  had  a  rotating  part,  called  the  rotor 
because  it  rotates –that  contains  electric  coils. Stator –fixed, and rotor –rotates. When  youconnectthe  
coil  in  the  rotor  to  the  direct  current  produced  by  a  battery,  the current from the battery would 
produce a magnetic field in the rotor.The  interaction  between  the  magnetic  field  from  the  electric  coil  
and  thatfromthe permanent magnets in the housing –the stator –would lead the rotor to turn. After turning a bit 
the magnetic field in the rotor would start to get aligned with that in the statorso that it doesn't turn anymore.
But  before  that  happens,  the  commutator  switches  the polarity  of  the  connection between coil and battery. 
The reversed polarity leads to a new magnetic field and the rotor will keep rotating. A lot can be said about these 
motors but we won’t, because they are no longer used in commercial electric vehicles. That is largely  due to the  
brushes needed for the commutator to  work.  These  brushes  can  malfunction  and cause  sparks,  they  must  be  
regularly  replaced and they  lead  to  a loss  in efficiency.  They  also  need  a  starting  mechanism  to  avoid 
burning out.A  better  alternative  was  invented  by  Nicola  Tesla.  This  AC  Induction  motor –or  Induction 
motor for short –needs no permanent magnets. Instead the magnetic field is produced by a current that flows through 
the windings in the housing or stator. The magnetic field from the stator will induce -hence the name, a voltage and 
current in the windings of the rotor. This in turn leads to the rotor producing its own magnetic field. And this  
magnetic field will make the rotor turn so as to align itself with the magnetic field from the stator. Now Nicola Tesla 
had a second trick up his sleeve.He  connected  the  stator  to the alternating  current  which  means  the  magnetic  
field  in  the stator was also alternating. Actually,  if  you  do itcleverly  enough  you  can  create  a  so  called  
rotating  magnetic  field  or RMF. And the rotor will follow this rotating magnetic field in the stator, without the 
need for a  commutator  with  brushes. See  the  advantage? Since  the  rotor  follows  the  rotating magnetic  field  
only  after  it  has  created  an  induced  electric  field  itself,  it  is  always  lagging behind a bit. The amount 
that the rotor lags behind is called “slip”. This slip causes the rotor to always be out of sync with the rotating 
magnetic field a bit. That’s why an induction motor is called an asynchronous motor.The first AC Induction motors ran 
at constant speed. But later it became possible to vary the frequency  of  the  alternating  current –stator -using  a  
so  called  variable  frequency  drive  or VFD.  Using  the  VFD  you  can  vary  how  fast  the  magnetic  field  turns  
by  varying  your alternating  current  or AC  frequency.  Other  names  for  VFD  are  Variable  Speed  Drive, Adjustable 
Frequency Drive, AC drive converter. It’s been very successful: I estimate that in 2017 over 90% of industrial motors were 
induction motors. It was also used in the first range of cars from the Tesla motor company.The  induction  motor  has  many  
advantages:  the most important might be that it’s so very simple to construct. It also has the lowersticker price because: 
no  permanent  magnet,  no  brushes,  no  position  sensor,  no  starting  mechanism.  (It  is  self starting.) Speed 
control is easy. You simply control the frequency of the alternating current. But there are some disadvantages: the induced 
currents in the coil cause efficiency losses. The induced losses also mean induced heat in the rotor and thus the need for 
cooling the rotor. It is also not the lightest or most compact electric motor.Recent  advances  in  material  science  have  
made  it  possible  to  produce  very  powerful magnets using neodymiumor some other materials. If we construct a rotor 
with permanent magnets  we  no  longer  need  to  induce  a  magnetic  field  in  the  rotor. The  magnets  have already 
placed it there.This avoids losses and heat development in the rotor. Because of all this, permanent magnet motors are currently 
the smallest and lightest electric motors you can buy. And because the rotor is already magnetized it is always in sync with 
the rotating magnetic field. That’s why permanent magnet motors are also classified as synchronous motors. Often the rotor 
with the permanent magnets on it runs at the outside. This is called an out-runner.  An out-runner  can  deliver  higher  
torque  at  lower  speeds. Sometimes the  rotor  and the permanent magnets run at the inside and this is called –you guessed 
it –an in-runner. An in-runner can quickly spin up to high speeds. So when high speed is not a problem, an in-runner can provide 
the same power in a smaller, lighter and cheaper package.The   permanent   magnet   motor   is   increasingly   used   in   all   
kinds   of   high-performance applications Electric vehicles are no exception. And  although  I  cannotstatistically  prove  it  
yet  it  seems  more  and  more  electric  vehicle manufacturers  are  replacing  induction  motor  with  permanent  magnet  motors.  
A  good example is Tesla. Although the  company  is  named  after  the  inventor  of  the  induction motor,Nicola  Tesla,itsnew 
models use the permanent magnet motor. The picture shows the Tesla Model 3 and it’s also true for the new Tesla semi truck.
The  advantages  of  the  permanent  magnet  motor  are  that  it  is  the  lightest  and  smallest motor. It’s also the most 
silent and efficient motor. The biggest disadvantage is that itneeds these  scarce earth metals and they are expensive. 
They are also a bit more complex to run, requiring a position sensor, starter mechanism and more advanced controller.A recent 
development is a motor that tries to combine the best of both worlds. It  has  a  rotor  that  contains  metal  thatis  formed  
in  such  a  way  thatwants  to  align  itself naturally  to  the  surrounding  magnetic  field.  So it doesn’t need to produce 
its  own  electric field through induced currents like the induction motor. And  this means less losses. And it doesn’t need 
permanent magnets which makes it much cheaper than a permanent magnet motor.This bestows the synchronous reluctance motor 
with some important advantages: it   hashightorque   and   efficiency   (especially   at   higher   speed)   that   is   
comparable   to permanent  magnet  motors.  It  does  not  need  permanent  magnets  which  makes  it  more rugged, cheaper 
and better for the environment. However,  italso  has  some  disadvantages:  efficiency  at  lower  speed  can  be  a  bit  
lagging compared to a permanent magnet motor. There is higher inherent noise and torque ripple. However,  as  rotor  design  
improves  and  especially  as  advanced  motor  controllers  and algorithms  improve the noise and torque ripple... this motor  
might  become  almost  as  good as a permanent magnet motor without all the drawbacksof an induction motor. So it could indeed 
become a motor that combines the best of both worlds.Talking about combining the best of both worlds: there are rumors that 
the Tesla Model 3 is not  a  simple  permanent  magnet  motor  but  a  so  called  permanent magnet  assistantreluctance motor. 
I don’t know if the rumours are true, but let’s sum it all up.We  based  the  graph  on  an overview from Kumar and Jain. If  
reliability  and  sticker  price  are  your  main  concerns,  look  no  further  than  the  induction motor. But if you have 
other concerns as well, there are better alternatives. If  all you  care  about  are  maximum  performance  in  terms  of  
size,  weight  and efficiency,  the permanent magnet motor is your best bet. On a side note: even though the permanent magnet 
motor is the most expensive one in this comparison, it is still much cheaper per kilowatt than conventional gasoline or diesel 
motor. But  if  you  are  looking  at  the  best  compromise  on  all  aspects,  and  if  you  are  not  afraid  of advanced  
controllers,  there  is  a good  chance  that  the  synchronous  reluctance  motor  is  the best choice for your application. 
My  personal prediction is  that  synchronous  reluctance motors  will improve  more  and more though advanced  rotor  designs  
and controllers  that  minimize  torque  ripple  and  thus  noise, until  they  match  permanent  magnet  motor  performance,  
at  a  cost  and  reliability  that matches the induction motor. Maybeassisted by small permanent magnets. Time will tell if 
I’m right on that one. That  concludes  this  introduction  into  electric  motors  for  the  electric  vehicles.  
