A  power  electronic  converter  is  an  electronic  device  made  of  high  power  semiconductor switches that uses different switching states to change 
the magnitude and waveform of the voltage and current between the input and output. A semiconductor switch is the basic building block of any power 
electronic converter. We can see the schematic representation and real photo of a semiconductor switch. In this case, it is an insulated-gate bipolar 
transistor or called as IGBT inshort. These  power  electronic  switches  are  able  to  turn  on  and  turn  off  at  high  switching frequencies ranging 
from hundreds of hertz up to hundreds of kilohertz. In other words, they are able to turn on and turn off within half a microsecond. The new silicon 
carbide or Gallium nitride based switches turn on and off even faster within tens of nanoseconds. In this particular IGBT switch, an antiparallel diodeis 
included that allows reverse currents. The  other  commonly  used  semiconductor  devices  in  power  converters  are  Metal-Oxide Semiconductor  
Field-Effect  Transistor  or  MOSFETs  as  they  are  commonly  called  and thyristors. The  most  common  way  to  classify  power  converters  is  based  
on  whether  the  input  and output is AC or DC, that is if it is alternating current or is direct current. Based on this classification, we can have four 
types of power converters, namely a DC to DC converter, a DC to AC converter which is commonly called an inverter, an AC to DC converter which is commonly 
called a rectifier and an AC to AC converter. For example, a DC to AC converter converts power from an input DC source to an output AC load. 
The  second  way  to  classify  converters  is  based  on  if  they  facilitate  unidirectional  or bidirectional power flow. Typically, unidirectional 
converters use diodes at the output in order to allow power flow in one direction only. In  case  of  bidirectional  power  converters,  semiconductor  
switches  like  MOSFETs  or  IGBTS are used on both input and output sides. A  third  way  to  classify  converters  is  based  on  whether  there  is  a  
transformer  isolation between input and output. Isolation in power converters is primarily required for safety reasons. For example, all mobile phone 
chargers are isolated so that the 5V low voltage output is safe to touch even though the input is from 110V or 230V AC. Further, the transformer used for 
galvanic isolation can have a different turn ratio between input and output that can help in stepping or stepping down the voltage. This table gives you an 
overview of the three simple ways to classify power converters based on AC or DC power, power flow direction and presence of isolation. Different  types  of  
power  converters  can  be  developed  that  meet  a  combination  of  these characteristics. With  this  knowledge,  we  can  look  at  the  four  main  
power  converters  in  an  electric  car namely the on-board charger, the traction battery converter, the auxiliary battery converter and  the  motor  drive
An  electric  car  uses  a  central  DC  bus,  called  High  voltage  bus  in  the figure, for exchanging power between the various electric  components, 
and the converters are responsible for controlling the power flows. The on-board charger is responsible for converting the AC power from the grid to the 
central DC bus for the charging the traction batteries. Hence,it is an AC to DC power converter. The battery converter then controls the  charging or 
discharging of the traction batteries by either drawing or feeding power from the High voltage bus. Hence, the battery converter is a bidirectional DC-DC 
converter. Similarly, the auxiliary battery converter is used  to charge the auxiliary battery by drawing power from the High voltage DC bus. Finally, the 
motor drive is a DC to AC inverter used to control and operate an AC motor. The motor drive is bidirectional and feeds power to the motor for propulsions 
and acts as an AC to DC rectifier by drawing power from the motor during regenerative braking. In some cases, the motor drive can be a DC to DC converter 
if the motor is a DC motor like a brushless DC motor. This   table   gives   an   overview   of   the   power   converters   in   an   electric   car   and   
their characteristics for AC and DC power flow, power flow direction and isolation. It  is  important  to  note  here  that  one  or  both  of  the  on-board  
charger  and  the  battery converter  has  to  be  isolated  so  that  there  is  isolation  between  the  battery  and  the  AC  grid for safety reasons. 
Secondly, both the traction battery converter and the motor drive must be bidirectional. Let us look deeper into the bidirectional power flow operation of 
the power converters and motors in an electric car. Any car needs the ability to both drive and brake in the forward and reverse direction. This can be 
represented using the four-quadrant torque-speed characteristics. The four quadrants from 1 to 4 correspond to driving in the forward direction, braking in 
the forward  direction,  driving  in  the  reverse  direction  and  braking  in  the  reverse  direction, respectively. Let us now look deeper into this. 
For  example,  first  quadrant  operation  is  when  the  motor  has  both  positive  polarity  torque and speed, and this results in forward driving of the 
car. In case of third quadrant operation, the motor has both negative polarity torque and speed, and this results in reverse driving of the car. Or in simple 
words, the car moves backwards.In  case  of  second  quadrant  operation,  the  motor  has  positive  polarity  speed  but  negative polarity torque. This  
happens  when  the  wheels  are  moving  forward,  but  the  torque  is in  the  opposite direction. This results in regenerative braking and the car slows 
down while moving forward. Regenerative  braking  can  also  be  implemented  for  operation  in  quadrant  4  by  extracting power out of the motor using 
the motor drive and to charge the traction batteries. If a DC motor and a DC electric drive are used, we can generalise that the torque magnitude and 
direction is dependent on the current magnitude and direction, respectively. Similarly,  the  speed  of  rotation  and  direction  is  dependent on  the  
voltage  magnitude  and polarity, respectively. So  in  order  to  control  the  torque  and  rotation  of  a  motor,  we  need  a  motor  drive  that  can 
control current and voltage of the motor, respectively. In  this  table,  we  can  see  the  four  combinations  of  motor inverter  voltage  and  current 
polarity and the corresponding motor rotation and torque for a DC motor. Each of these four unique combination results in operation in one of the four 
quadrants of the torque-speed characteristics. Electric cars, however, often use AC motors and their control is more complicated than DC motors. In case of 
AC motor, the forward and reverse rotation of the motor is controlled by changing the phases of the AC supply voltage from the motor drive. In order to 
control the torque and speed, a variable speed motor drive is used that changes both the AC voltage magnitude and frequency in order control the rotation 
speed of the AC motor. Generally,  the  speed  of  the  motor  can  be  increased  by  applying  an  AC  voltage  of  a  high frequency. To wrap up, we 
looked at what is power electronic converter and how power semiconductor switches play a key role in their operation. We learnt about different types of 
power converters based on AC or DC, isolation and power flow direction. The  four  key  power converters  in  an  electric  car  are  the  on-board  charger,  
traction  and auxiliary battery converter and the motor drive. The Motor drive facilitates in controlling the voltage, frequency, phase and current supplied 
to the motor resulting in four quadrant operation.
